#labels Featured
== Introduction ==

When writing tests it is sometimes difficult to get the balance right between overspecifying the test (and making it brittle to changes), and not specifying enough (making the test less valuable since it continues to pass even when the thing being tested is broken). Having a tool that allows you to pick out precisely the aspect under test and describe the values it should have, to a controlled level of precision, helps greatly in writing tests that are "just right". Such tests fail when the behaviour of the aspect under test deviates from the expected behaviour, yet continue to pass when minor, unrelated changes to the behaviour are made.

Hamcrest is designed to be such a tool. It helps you write tests that express intent in a flexible manner.

== My first Hamcrest test ==

We'll start be writing a very simple JUnit 3 test, but instead of using JUnit's `assertEquals` methods, we use Hamcrest's `assertThat` construct and the standard set of matchers, both of which we statically import:

{{{
import static org.hamcrest.MatcherAssert.assertThat;
import static org.hamcrest.Matchers.*;
import static org.hamcrest.examples.tutorial.EmptyCollection.*;

import junit.framework.TestCase;

public class BiscuitTest extends TestCase {
  public void testEquals() {
    Biscuit theBiscuit = new Biscuit("Ginger");
    Biscuit myBiscuit = new Biscuit("Ginger");
    assertThat(theBiscuit, equalTo(myBiscuit));
  }
}
}}}

The `assertThat` method is a stylized sentence for making a test assertion. In this example, the subject of the assertion is the object `biscuit` that is the first method parameter. The second method parameter is a matcher for `Biscuit` objects, here a matcher that checks one object is equal to another using the `Object equals` method. The test passes since the `Biscuit` class defines an equals method.

== Other test frameworks ==

Hamcrest has been designed from the outset to integrate with different unit testing frameworks. For example, Hamcrest can be used with [http://junit.org/ JUnit] 3 and 4 and [http://testng.org/ TestNG]. (For details have a look at the examples that come with the full Hamcrest distribution.) It is easy enough to migrate to using Hamcrest-style assertions in an existing test suite, since other assertion styles can co-exist with Hamcrest's.

Hamcrest can also be used with mock objects frameworks by using adaptors to bridge from the mock objects framework's concept of a matcher to a Hamcrest matcher. For example, [http://jmock.org/ JMock] 1's _constraints_ are Hamcrest's matchers. Hamcrest provides a JMock 1 adaptor to allow you to use Hamcrest matchers in your JMock 1 tests. JMock 2 doesn't need such an adaptor layer since it is designed to use Hamcrest as its matching library. Hamcrest also provides adaptors for [http://easymock.org/ EasyMock] 2. Again, see the Hamcrest examples for more details. 

== A tour of common matchers ==

Hamcrest comes with a library of useful matchers. Here are some of the most important ones. 

  * Core
    * `anything` - always matches, useful if you don't care what the object under test is
    * `describedAs` - decorator to adding custom failure description
    * `is` - decorator to improve readability - see "Sugar", below
  * Logical
    * `allOf` - matches if all matchers match, short circuits (like Java &&)
    * `anyOf` - matches if any matchers match, short circuits (like Java ||)
    * `not` - matches if the wrapped matcher doesn't match and vice versa
  * Object
    * `equalTo` - test object equality using Object.equals
    * `hasToString` - test Object.toString
    * `instanceOf`, isCompatibleType - test type
    * `notNullValue`, nullValue - test for null
    * `sameInstance` - test object identity
  * Beans
    * `hasProperty` - test JavaBeans properties
  * Collections
    * `array` - test an array's elements against an array of matchers
    * `hasEntry`, `hasKey`, `hasValue` - test a map contains an entry, key or value
    * `hasItem`, `hasItems` - test a collection contains elements
    * `hasItemInArray` - test an array contains an element
  * Number
    * `closeTo` - test floating point values are close to a given value
    * `greaterThan`, `greaterThanOrEqualTo`, `lessThan`, `lessThanOrEqualTo` - test ordering
  * Text
    * `equalToIgnoringCase` - test string equality ignoring case
    * `equalToIgnoringWhiteSpace` - test string equality ignoring differences in runs of whitespace
    * `containsString`, `endsWith`, `startsWith` - test string matching
